---
layout: page
title: Coordination of actin-myosin contractions
description: How does a thousand cells coherently generate force to bring about tissue-level folding?
img: assets/img/publication_preview/pulsed_contraction_crop.gif
importance: 3
category: science
related_publications: true
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

## Pulsatile actin-myosin contractions fold tissues

During _Drosophila_ gastrulation, around 1,200 mesoderm cells collectively contract
to form a fold in the tissue. The force necessary for this morphogenesis
is (partly) generated by actin-myosin contractions at the apical surfaces of the
mesoderm cells.

These actin-myosin contractions are _pulsatile_, meaning they occur in discrete
steps, driven by the phosphorylation dynamics of myosin; each pulse of myosin activation
leads to a discrete constriction of the cell apical surface.

<br>
<br>
<br>

## How are discrete pulses spatiotemporally coordinated?

I became interested in how a large, mechanically coupled sheet of epithelial cells
coordinate these discrete contraction events in a way that eventually propagates
tissue tension across a millimeter in length.

I built computational methods to extract when and where these contractions occurred
in the embryo, using a combination of image analysis and time-series analysis. {% cite xie_intracellular_2015 %}

<div class='row'>
  <div class='col'>
    {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/ventral_furrow/pulses.png" title="pulse finding" class="img-fluid rounded" %}
  </div>
</div>

Then, using machine learning, Monte Carlo methods, and spatial statistical analysis,
I found that neighboring pulses are coordinated within the epithelium. Cells that
are next to contractions are more likely to mount a contraction of their own. Contractions
that are next to other contractions are also more likely to be irreversible.

<div class='row'>
  <div class='col'>
    {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/ventral_furrow/pulsed_contractions_full.gif" title="coordinating pulses" class="img-fluid rounded" %}
  </div>
</div>


<br>
<br>
<br>

## How does a contracting epithelium tolerate heterogeneity in cell size?

Using my computational method, I analyzed a class of developmental mutants
who fail to mount 'coherent' contractions. In these mutants, a subset of
cells in the mesoderm successfully constrict their apical surface, while the rest
of the cells end up with expanded apices, resulting in failed gastrulation.

These mutations encode genes in the _Drosophila_ Gα12/13 pathway, including the gene _concertina_ (_cta_),
which activates RhoA GTPase to control actin-myosin dynamics.

I found that, contrary to previous models that suggested these pathways propagated a
contraction signal throughout the tissue, these pathways actually acted cell-autonomously.
They ensured that the apical cortex in each contracting cell is robustly organized
to withstand heterogeneity in apical sizes. In _cta_ mutants, cells that are
initially larger than their neighbors cannot sustain enough tension throughout
its apical cortext, and will be pulled apart by its contracting neighbors.

Thus, this pathway buffers the contracting mesoderm against heterogeneity
in cell size and ensures robust morphogenesis. {% cite xie_loss_2016 %}

<div class="container">
  <div class="row justify-content-md-center">
    <div class="col-md-auto">
      {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/publication_preview/cta_buffering.png" title="cta" class="img-fluid rounded" %}
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<br>
<br>
<br>
